Around the world, people everywhere
are looking for a savior.
They long for a savior
who can rescue them from disease,
from hunger,
from poverty, from crime,
from war,
even from death.
Well, in the midst of so many calamities
and so many problems,
why are Jehovah’s people rejoicing?
Because our magnificent,
our Almighty God,
Jehovah, is that Savior.
We have him and,
as a result,
we feel joy in our hearts.
The Scriptures describe Jehovah
as being a “Grand Savior.”
We know it is a part
of his personality, his identity,
to want to rescue
and save his faithful servants.
Well, knowing that Jehovah
wants to save us,
how should it
make us feel?
Let’s open our Bibles and look
at this thought in the book of Psalms.
Psalm 9:14
says: “So that I may declare
your praiseworthy deeds
“in the gates of the daughter of Zion,
and rejoice
in your acts of salvation.”
So now, how should we feel
about Jehovah’s ability to save us?
about his acts of salvation?
Well, the psalmist said
that we want to rejoice
in Jehovah’s ability to save.
And, really, brothers,
when we have faith,
confidence,
that Jehovah wants to save us,
that he has the ability to save us,
and that he has ways
and means to save us,
this truly is
a reason for us to rejoice.
If we have that faith,
if we have that confidence,
we are going to be able
to face the future
with real confidence,
knowing that whatever trial may come our way,
we have our Savior.
But now, brothers,
to reassure us,
to strengthen our confidence,
that Jehovah really is our Savior,
it helps us to look to the past,
to Bible times,
to see how Jehovah rescued
and saved his people
both as a nation
and also as individuals.
Now, let’s look rapidly
at three different examples
from the Scriptures where Jehovah
saved his people as a nation.
Now, here’s the first one.
It’s from Exodus chapter 14.
Now you’ll remember here
that the nation of Israel
was right there at the Red Sea
with Pharaoh’s armies all around.
Well, it looked hopeless,
but what did Jehovah do?
He opened up that Red Sea
right in front of his people
and allowed them to walk
through on dry land.
What a salvation that was!
And then, what about in the time
of Jehoshaphat, in the nation of Judah?
Do you remember when all those armies
of the opposing nations
came and surrounded
them again?
Well now, Jehoshaphat,
in 2 Chronicles chapter 20,
looked to Jehovah and said:
‘Jehovah, we just don’t know what to do,
but our eyes are toward you.’
Well, what did Jehovah do?
He said:
“Take your position, stand still,
and see
the salvation of Jehovah.”
Well, that’s what they did.
They went out.
They took their position.
And without them
having to fight at all,
Jehovah threw
those other armies into confusion
and they all
wiped each other out
without the nation of Judah
having to do a thing.
Jehovah saved his people.
And as a third example,
what about Hezekiah?
Now, we had
this amazing Bible drama
several years ago at our regional convention
where we saw Hezekiah
look to Jehovah
for his salvation.
And what happened?
Well, Jehovah sent
one angel who wiped out
185,000 men in one night.
Well now,
what’s the point, brothers?
It’s obvious
from our review of the Scriptures
that Jehovah is a Savior
of his people as a group,
as a nation.
We’ve seen it over and over again
in the Scriptures.
But what about as individuals?
Well now, here’s a nice example
of what the Bible says
here in Psalm 34.
Let’s read it first
before we look at the example.
It’s Psalm 34:18.
Psalm 34:18
says: “Jehovah is close
to the brokenhearted;
“He saves those
who are crushed in spirit.
“Many are the hardships
of the righteous one,
“[But what does it say here?
Notice, brothers]
but Jehovah rescues
him from them all.”
So what is it?
What’s the point?
See, Jehovah rescues
the righteous one,
not just the righteous nation
but the righteous one.
Now, here’s our example.
Think about the faithful woman Hannah.
Now, you remember her situation.
Hannah was barren.
She was constantly being harassed
and tormented
by her husband’s other wife Peninnah.
And so she went to the temple,
and she poured out
her heart to Jehovah.
Will you look at this with me?
Let’s go to 1 Samuel chapter 1,
1 Samuel chapter 1,
and you see here
that in verse 10,
it says that “Hannah
was extremely bitter,
and she began to pray to Jehovah
and to weep uncontrollably.”
Well, this faithful servant of God
just poured out her heart,
begged Jehovah for his help,
but she had
a very specific request.
You see, in verse 11,
she asked Jehovah for a child, a male child.
And she told Jehovah
that if she would get this child,
she would dedicate him
to the service of God.
Well, what happened?
You see,
look down here at verse 18.
Once Hannah had expressed
this prayer to Jehovah,
in effect, she had just thrown
her burden onto him.
Look at what verse 18 says:
“Her face
was no longer downcast.”
Well, do you remember at the beginning,
she was extremely bitter?
Now it says her face
was no longer downcast.
What does it mean?
Well, Jehovah was already
giving her the strength
to be able
to endure her situation.
But it didn’t end there
because now look at verse 20:
“Within a year,” it says,
“Hannah became pregnant.”
So Jehovah gave her
the request of her heart.
Well, can you imagine
how Hannah must have felt?
If you look over at chapter 2
and verse 1, look what she says:
“My heart rejoices in Jehovah;
“my horn is exalted by Jehovah.
“My mouth is opened wide
against my enemies,
“for I rejoice
in your acts of salvation.”
Well now, obviously,
Hannah rejoiced
that Jehovah
had become her Savior
and that she had experienced
his acts of salvation.
What’s the point, brothers?
What’s the point?
Well, as individuals,
we can pray to Jehovah
with our specific distresses,
with our specific requests
and concerns.
We know that Jehovah honors
those who honor him.
And we know all of us
have experienced this when we feel
that Jehovah
has heard our prayer,
and he has in some way
acted in our behalf.
But now let’s look
at another example.
Here it’s Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego.
Now, you remember
those three faithful Hebrews were there,
and King Nebuchadnezzar
had erected this golden image.
And he said everyone
had to bow down to it,
or they would be thrown
into the fiery furnace.
Well, what did Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego do?
They absolutely refused
to obey that order.
They had to listen to Jehovah.
Well, those men were tied up
just as Nebuchadnezzar had warned.
They were tied up,
and they were thrown into that fiery furnace.
But now, dear brothers,
I want you to think about this.
How do you imagine
this scene in your mind?
Do you think that as they
were going into the fiery furnace,
they were all in a panic and they
were regretting their decision?
‘Oh, I’m so sorry that I
didn’t bow down to the image.’
Absolutely not.
Just look at what these men said.
Look at Daniel chapter 3,
Daniel chapter 3,
and let’s look at verse 16 here:
“Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego answered the king:
“‘O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need
to answer you in this matter.
“‘If it must be,
our God whom we serve
“‘is able to rescue us
from the burning fiery furnace, O king,
“‘and to rescue us from your hand.
“‘But even if he does not,
“‘let it be known to you, O king,
that we will not serve your gods
or worship the image of gold
that you have set up.’”
Well now, when you hear those words,
is there any regret there?
Is there any weakness?
Is there any panic?
No.
Even though
they were facing death,
Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego faced it with courage.
They faced it with resolve.
They faced it with dignity.
Well, how they must have rejoiced
when after being rescued,
even Nebuchadnezzar himself
had to praise Jehovah
for the way he
had rescued his servants!
Well now, brothers,
what’s the point of this review?
Obviously, in Bible times,
Jehovah God
has saved his people
both as a nation
and as individuals.
And we know that Jehovah
delights to do this
and that it is
a cause for rejoicing
when Jehovah’s servants
experience his salvation.
But now, here’s the question.
We know Jehovah delights
to rescue us, to save us.
We know he’s moved
to do so by his loyal love.
But what does it really mean?
Does it mean today
that when any sort of trial comes our way,
that Jehovah
is just going to rush in?
He’s just going to intervene
and rescue us every time?
No, it does not.
It does not mean that.
Now, why?
If Jehovah loves us
and has the power, why is it
that he isn’t rescuing us
from every situation?
Well, do you remember
what Satan said to Jehovah
about Job
in Job chapter 1?
See, Satan said:
‘You’ve put a hedge around Job.
‘You’ve blessed
everything he does.
‘You haven’t allowed any calamity
to come to him.
‘The only reason he serves you
is just because of selfish reasons.
‘He doesn’t really love you.
He just worships you
for what he can get from you.’
You see, that same charge
could be made about any of us
if Jehovah just rescued us from everything.
So, what will Jehovah do?
Well, when we’re facing trials,
it’s true
that in some circumstances,
Jehovah may remove the trial
but in many other situations,
Jehovah may strengthen us
so that we’ll be able
to endure the trial.
Either way, when we feel,
when we experience,
that Jehovah is acting on our behalf,
how does it make us feel?
We truly, truly rejoice.
You know, brothers,
this is not theory.
This very week,
I lost my own father in death.
My father was 90 years old.
He had served
Jehovah faithfully for 63 years.
Now, brothers, this is a trial
that every single one of us
experience as God’s people.
But some of you, like me,
have experienced the death of a loved one
during this coronavirus pandemic.
I’ll tell you
that it’s not an easy situation.
But what can we say?
Well, I can say myself
that we have felt the love of Jehovah
in all of the e-mails,
in all of the phone calls,
in all the different ways
brothers and sisters have found
to provide the support
that we need.
That’s been true in my case.
I know it’s been true
for all of you who’ve had the same
or very similar experience
at this difficult time.
Jehovah is giving us
what we need
so that we can continue
to serve him faithfully.
And so when some big trial
comes your way,
ask yourself: ‘Am I confident
‘that Jehovah’s loyal love
is going to move him
‘to act on my behalf?
‘Are his acts of salvation
going to be manifest for me
so that I am going
to feel them myself?’
And then,
does that confidence
that Jehovah is going to intervene,
that he is going to help us,
cause us to rejoice
and be happy
in the knowledge
that our God is with us?
Well, now in the following video,
I want you to take notice
of this beautiful experience
of a dear sister
who did not have the trial
removed from her,
but just notice how Jehovah
has strengthened her to be able to endure.
I was born in Malawi in 1962.
I lost my eyesight at two years of age
because of an eye disease.
We have to rely on the rains
for the food we eat and sell,
as it is our only source of income.
I also look after both my parents.
My father is 99 years old,
and my mother is 92 years old.
Poverty is very time-consuming.
There are a lot of household chores to do
to keep things clean and neat,
like fetching water for our daily needs.
In the evening, after we have eaten,
this is the time for reading.
When I was young,
Father took the lead in our family worship,
which he still does.
But now because of his failing eyesight,
I read to them.
I read with my fingers,
so nighttime is no problem.
My fingers are my eyes.
One scripture that really touches my heart
is James 5:11, which says:
“Look!
“We consider happy
those who have endured.”
Job endured his trials,
and at the end,
he saw all the good that Jehovah
had blessed him with.
This convinces me
that Jehovah will act in the near future,
blessing us with all the things
that we are lacking,
fulfilling all his promises.
And so I’m happy to endure.
God’s Kingdom and his sovereignty
are first in my life.
It is only God’s Kingdom that will solve
all these problems.
I feel privileged that I’ve been able
to serve as a regular pioneer
for 36 years now and have been blessed
to help 64 persons to know Jehovah.
I’m so happy with song 76.
I don’t see myself as poor.
I have the Bible and many
different publications in Chichewa Braille.
We have the congregation, the ministry,
and our brothers and sisters.
All these things make me very happy!
We are not worried
about our current situation
because we are spiritually rich.
Wasn’t that amazing to see
that beautiful experience of our sister?
Now, Jehovah
hasn’t taken away her trial.
She’s still blind.
She still has a very limited means,
but look how Jehovah has blessed her.
Look how she’s able
to help so many people
to come to know
about Jehovah.
How wonderful!
But now let’s look
at a second video.
Now, we’re going to watch a video
where Jehovah really did step in
and remove a trial from our dear brother
who was in a refugee camp.
Let’s watch.
Because of the civil war,
we had to take refuge
in a safer part of the country.
When we arrived,
soldiers took us
to internment camps to hold us
until they could confirm our identities.
In the camps, we lived in tents,
and it was unbearably hot in them.
It was a struggle even to get water.
We needed to wait in a queue
for four to five hours every day.
During the war, our eldest son was killed.
It was a big loss for our family.
All we could do to cope was pray to Jehovah
and find comfort in the Bible.
One day, the brothers
from the relief committee came
and informed us
that a regional convention would be held.
They had spoken to the camp officials,
requesting permission for us to go.
For four days, morning and evening,
we went to the officials
to ask for permission.
But they would not tell us if we
would be released for the convention.
Suddenly one afternoon,
much to our surprise,
we were approved
to leave the camp for five days.
At that time, we had been
in the internment camp for months.
We had not been allowed to go anywhere.
We were so happy that we got the permission
to attend the convention.
We never expected it!
At the time, we had some clothes.
But we had nothing
for the three-day convention.
However, the brothers outside the camp
helped us enormously.
They were with us
and cared for all our needs
so we could be ready for the convention.
We still wondered
where we were going to stay
and how we would get
our accommodations.
However, when we arrived,
the brothers hugged us
and warmly welcomed us.
We were really encouraged.
Even though we faced
many challenges and difficulties
in the internment camp,
that convention
was like a nourishing meal for us.
It was a real joy eating at Jehovah’s table.
We can never forget those moments.
After the convention,
a brother from the Governing Body
gave a special talk to those
from the internment camps.
That talk really strengthened us.
The convention helped us to be courageous,
especially after we returned to the camp.
Although we faced many losses,
the convention not only gave us comfort
but also helped us to face
the challenges ahead.
Now my youngest son and I
are serving as ministerial servants,
and my wife has been serving
as a regular pioneer
for the past 17 years.
She continued pioneering even while
we were in the internment camp.
We realized that Jehovah is always there,
caring for us and sustaining us continuously.
So how wonderful
that our amazing God, Jehovah,
helped this dear brother
and his family
so that they would be able
to attend the convention!
Well, dear brothers,
what have we seen thus far in this talk?
We’ve been able to see
that in the past, in Bible times,
Jehovah was
the Savior of his people.
And in our modern times right now,
we see how Jehovah
is strengthening us
and acting on our behalf
so that we can continue
to serve him faithfully.
But now,
what about the very near future?
What can we say about that?
Well, we know
that these last days
are very soon going to lead
into the great tribulation.
As Jesus said
at Matthew 24:21,
this is going to be a “great tribulation
such as has not occurred
since the world’s beginning until now,
no, nor will occur again.”
After the destruction
of Babylon the Great
and before the outbreak of Armageddon,
what is going to happen?
Gog of Magog,
this coalition of nations,
is going to lead an all-out attack
on Jehovah’s servants.
Well now,
knowing that that attack
is coming closer and closer every day,
how should we be feeling?
Should it make us feel
just completely filled with anxiety?
Should we be in terror
of those events that are coming?
Not at all.
Please read with me
what Jesus said here in Revelation chapter 2.
Now, at Revelation 2:10,
Jesus is speaking to anointed Christians
in the congregation of Smyrna.
Now, notice what
he says to them:
“Do not be afraid of the things
you are about to suffer.
“Look!
“The Devil will keep on throwing
some of you into prison
“so that you may be
fully put to the test,
“and you will have tribulation
for ten days.
“Prove yourself faithful
even to death,
and I will give you
the crown of life.”
Well now, what do we discern
from these words of Jesus?
Well, first of all,
those who die faithfully
and keep their integrity
are guaranteed
to have salvation
from Jehovah.
But there’s something else
that we can discern from these words.
It tells us
that during these last days,
some of Jehovah’s servants
are going to experience death.
In our modern history already,
we know our brothers
have been thrown into prison.
Some have been tortured
and, yes,
some have even been put to death
because of their integrity.
In South Korea alone,
over a period of some 70 years,
19,352 of our brothers
were in prison
and 5 of those brothers
were actually put to death
because of their faith.
Well, what can we say
about those brothers in South Korea;
and those that died in Nazi, Germany;
and those that died in Eritrea;
and those that died during the Soviet Union
because of their faith?
We know that their salvation
is completely assured.
They are completely safe
in the safest place in the universe
—the memory
of our Grand God, Jehovah.
Well then, what about our brothers
who are experiencing
persecution right now?
We know that some of our brothers
are watching this program right now
in countries where our work is banned
or under very, very severe restrictions.
What can we say about those
dear brothers and sisters?
Well, let’s read together
this encouraging thought
in Psalm 67
—Psalm 67
and verse 1.
It says:
“God will show us favor
“and bless us; he will make
his face shine upon us
“so that your way may be known
throughout the earth,
your acts of salvation
among all the nations.”
Well, what’s the point?
You see, Jehovah is doing
what verse 1 says.
He’s showing his favor,
and he’s blessing
his people in these countries
where the work is under ban.
And, as a result,
we are able to see
Jehovah’s acts of salvation
for his people.
Well now, there are
so many examples of this.
I wish we had another hour
to be able to tell you all of them.
But I’d like to just share
one experience
that is similar to many,
many more that we have received.
It comes from Russia.
One of our sisters was there
in the prison in Russia.
Two of the female prisoners
who were in the cell with her
were imprisoned
for selling drugs.
Now, one day, these two prisoners
began singing songs
about criminal life.
Now, the sister didn’t understand
the language, but she just knew
that the thoughts and the ideas
in these songs were immoral and foul.
And she just didn’t want
to be in that environment.
So she prayed
to Jehovah to help her.
Well, suddenly,
one of the women began singing
song number 120
from our former songbook.
Well, the sister was shocked.
“How do you know this song?”
she asked.
Then they all sang
the song together.
It turned out that this woman
had learned the song from her mother
who had previously studied
the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses
and had memorized the song.
Our sister felt
the loving hand of Jehovah
in responding
to her prayer so quickly.
Oh brothers, it’s a wonderful experience,
but there are so many similar experiences
when Jehovah has shown
his hand on behalf of his people
in small ways
and sometimes in big ways.
But let’s look
at one other experience.
There are many examples
of when our brothers, in the courtroom
during their own trials,
have made statements that are similar
to what Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego said to Nebuchadnezzar.
I just want to give
you one example.
This is the statement
from Brother Sergey Skrynnikov
that he gave in the courtroom
at his own hearing.
Here’s a small excerpt.
‘Let us take a look
into the future.
‘If for another ten years or so
the government keeps putting
‘Jehovah’s Witnesses into prisons
and correctional colonies,
‘there will be about 200
of them in every prison.
‘Imagine four congregations
‘of Jehovah’s Witnesses
in one prison!
‘The prison administrators
will be begging
‘the Ministry of Justice
to set Jehovah’s Witnesses free.
‘What do you imagine the majority
of Witnesses would pray for?
‘“Lord, don’t soften
the heart of the government;
‘“don’t let him set me free.
I have so many Bible students
and sincere people to talk to.”’
Isn’t that wonderful?
Just hear the confidence
in his voice!
But then look how he ended
his statement to the court.
Here’s what he said:
“God is one and the same
whether we are free or in prison.
“Therefore, we are not abandoned.
“He is with us everywhere
as long as we stay faithful to him.
“. . . Hebrews 13:6 assures me:
“‘Jehovah is my helper;
I will not be afraid.
“What can man do to me?’
“Jehovah God himself will help me.
Of whom should I be afraid?”
Well, Brother Skrynnikov,
this very humble brother,
made this powerful statement
in the courtroom.
What does it show us?
Obviously, Jehovah
is strengthening his people.
He’s giving them the power and the courage
that they need to be so bold and so frank
even before these powerful authorities.
Well, what do we expect
in the very near future?
This all-out attack
of Gog of Magog
will come against God’s people.
But when it begins,
what is Jehovah going to do?
Well, let me read to you just an excerpt
from our Pure Worship book
that just beautifully expresses
what we can expect to see:
“Before they are destroyed,
our enemies will see the sign
“of the Son of man,
likely a supernatural manifestation
“of the power of Jehovah and Jesus.
“The opposers will see things
that cause them extreme anxiety.
“As Jesus foretold,
‘people will become faint out of fear
“and expectation of the things
coming upon the inhabited earth.’
“To their horror, they will realize
“that they miscalculated when they
attacked Jehovah’s people.
“They will be forced to know
the Creator in his role
“as military commander,
Jehovah of armies.
“Jehovah will no doubt unleash
heavenly armies
“and natural forces
in such a way
“that he protects his loyal servants
but eliminates his enemies.”
What a powerful description!
It just reminds me
of our video
a couple of years ago
at a regional convention where we saw
those forces coming against God’s people,
and then what did we see?
Well, suddenly, from the heavens,
here is Jesus Christ,
the 144,000, and all those
heavenly armies riding into battle.
And you remember that Jesus
just pulls back that bow
and lets that arrow go,
and all of those enemies are gone forever.
Brothers and sisters,
don’t you just long for the day
when you will see those things
with your own eyes?
What a wonderful time
that will be when we experience
the salvation of Jehovah!
Well, what can we say
as we have discussed
this wonderful topic
of Jehovah
as our Grand Savior?
Well, when we look to the future,
we really can have the confidence
of what Isaiah 12:2 says.
Let’s read it
—Isaiah 12:2.
It says: “Look!
“God is my salvation.
“I will trust
and feel no dread;
“for Jah Jehovah
is my strength and my might,
and he has become
my salvation.”
Well, just as Isaiah said,
we have no reason to fear
—we have no reason to dread
if we have our confidence
in our God, Jehovah.
Now, whether we face
death with dignity
during these last days
or we experience
miraculous deliverance
at the great tribulation,
either way,
what can we say?
We know that we
will have the same outcome.
We will all experience the salvation
that comes from our God, Jehovah,
because what is the assurance
that Isaiah 54:17 gives us?
“No weapon formed against you
will have any success.”
Well, brothers,
if we have that confidence
that Jehovah
truly is our Grand Savior,
then no matter what calamity,
no matter what terror,
no matter what trial
may come upon us now or in the future,
we will be able to continue to rejoice
in Jehovah’s acts of salvation.